It was a huge American.
and when Harper then sold, I think Ranschbrook took over, I don't know how to detail it there, but Ranschbrook had what was well known in the same spell like in the charm of the perverted charm of the very
and it was very well.
So that was not good.
I mentioned Reisner who has published, in the time it's a little periodical, already in Vienna and in the world it's true.
It's about books, not so, not about the experience, it's about books.
It's just what you want to know more about things you should talk to,
So tell me a little bit about your husband's experience.
Well, I will tell you.
He was born in a book of mine.
1909, went for eight years to the Orthodox Jewish program.
And that went for years to the Orthodox Jewish program.
because he had always wanted to become an entrepreneur.
He had an uncle who was a lawyer, lived life with a lawyer, always indirectly.
And late in life he became an entrepreneur.
The only father of his mother, he was very close, not only because of the books, but they had a son at exactly the same age as my husband.
He was also called A.M.
He was called A.M.
He was an Amsterdam.
He had a business in Amsterdam.
It was somewhat different from him, but it was open.
So did you name him set up in Frankfurt or something?
No.
Now that when he entered, he said that he went to a bank for four years.
It was called his father.
He had read stuff.
commercial experience.
So, he worked in the bank for a year, then life is well announced.
Then he went for about a year to time, and he worked as a volunteer at the .
I mean, I think that's what he might have done with long success.
I worked with Mr. Mollier.
How is Mollier?
M-O-L-I-T-R.
M-O-I-T-R.
M-O-M-I-T-R.
And, you know, they told about this and that he tried to get a job.
And someone said, why don't you try to get a job?
I don't know.
So he went to this and said, he would like to put up this thing.
Well, no, it's not a job.
It's not a job.
It's not a job, you know.
It's a problem.
With about...
That must be that he got married and he got married before, I would say, the end of the 20s.
He's 68, he's 70, he's 68.
Ah, and Mr. Monde, is that more true here?
Where do you want to start?
and he likes to be very French and always, he didn't have watch, but he always went out for the next door, and he had a big watch out, and he said, you're not sure, you're not sure, you're not sure, you're not sure.
This is the way he worked in the bank, and I'm going to say,
Already 12?
Because then I went to do that and again volunteered for a while.
And then he had the first job in the religion.
G-R-A-U-P.
One of the expressions of... How of God.
And that was a very big auction house.
I think it could almost be compared to the auction house.
I mean, it was a real big auction house.
Maybe not.
But they had art, and they had books.
And they got great collections, which he cut off.
That was a good auction house.
before the college.
Had he been developing a specialty at all since 2000?
No.
He was preparing and specialized technology.
Then he went to New York to
Anyway, he worked there for a number of his big firms in UNESCO.
Well, I went there to UNESCO study
I knew your father and he was very kind of a machine owner.
I knew your family.
went to a different synagogue.
Then HALLE was the correct name, H-A-L-L-E, HALLE in the UK.
And they haven't called it much in our country, but this is my problem with it.
And this is...
It was an old film.
Mr. Haller had died.
Mrs. Haller had taken over.
And Mrs. Haller was not an experienced woman.
But she had a man by the name of Schulze Schrauf.
You might or might not.
He was a very German man.
And he would have had an enormous amount of children on Schulze Schrauf.
Schulze Schrauf
anti-semitism.
He wasn't a Nazi.
Very good.
But that anti-semitism is just a shirt of business of the Nazis.
He doesn't see that.
Mr. Schulz.
But anybody hired you, too.
But it was his father.
No, no, no.
It was his father.
Did I hire you those?
Schulzstraten?
F.C.H.
U-L-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-T-S-T-R-A-
This is where Nazism was born, and this is when the Nazis come to power.
Right, exactly, and he was early now.
Except when Hitler became Chancellor, Mrs. Halle was born out, Mr. Schulz took over the term.
And he went home.
I don't know if he was very specific.
If I have that, I really don't know, and I don't want to tell you a lie.
But he went home.
I mean, he was quite clear that he wasn't angry.
Then he talked, however.
He liked to become an excellent teacher.
He did not like that he was a Nazi.
But talked to him and said,
I will start kind of in the book business, being talking about France, and would like to buy a block of books.
And at the end, Mr. Schulz's chart house, at that time, said, I'm not interested in either science or medicine.
If you want to buy a block of books, and these books were bought over 50 years, you know, and stood there with a spark,
This was the start, which was... And Mrs. Haller didn't know anything about it.
And she already had come to Switzerland, and Emil bought the book from Mr. Schulz's grasshouse.
Emil always tells the way Mr. Schulz's grasshouse greeted Mrs. Haller.
There came a customer in, and Mrs. Haller was ancient to sell as much as possible.
A good Jewish woman who wanted to do business,
Why did she hire Schultes?
She did hire Schultes.
He was long there.
So he probably worked with the husband.
Oh, yes, for many years.
And the husband, he was a good man he was.
But Mrs. Hallerich Noah, he told me, he could not tell him what it was.
And he would always say, she's a native of how they were there.
or the Germans, if someone comes in and asks you for toilet paper, you cannot offer him steel room.
That gives you the relationship.
So, your husband brought the mask?
So, my husband said, I would like to open the book here.
And I told him that if you are ready, let me know.
I would get you a lot of silence and meditation.
That's what you would expect.
And was your husband interested in that material?
He had no idea.
He was more interested in that material.
But it was books, and you see the books are already unlocked, they are complete, because I'm sure you have heard that a book seamless, lack of fortune, this fortune, is an incomplete book.
You know, you have a wonderful book, and it looks complete, but when you go home and collate it, you know the expression collate it, and collate it, you see there is
I mean, it's not a page because you can count the pages.
When English started, and I was studying in school, because I was original when I was in Munich, I studied law, and I was thrown out of the law school, before Emil was thrown out of the firm.
Because I'm Jewish, yes.
And it was meant that it was spelled out that the university does not want any Jewish student to have any university.
You know, I've interviewed Otto Bettman for this book.
Do you know Otto?
Yeah, I know.
I know of him.
I don't know him.
He went to Florida last year.
Yeah, he was a Bettman.
Yeah, yeah.
I have never met him, but Emilio told him.
Emilio told him.
Anyway, you know, the collating of the book was compared with the one because I have page numbers.
And I remember the start of Claude Hedge, I was going back to school here.
And I didn't want law, I knew I could do school back here.
So I went and spoke with them.
I went and spoke with them.
You're jumping ahead of the story.
Yeah, only a little bit.
Because I said to Emil, my oldest son, he was six.
The children were born in France.
Emil gave me a book, a thick book to collate.
And Claude said, I'll do that for you now, Dad, but I won't do that always.
Anyway, we are still in Germany.
So this is the one back in 1934 now?
In 1933 now.
Are you aware that you said in 1934?
In 1934, yeah, but this is still 1933.
And he goes home.
I go in 1933.
I offer a job in Paris.
It's Paris.
Now, are you dating at this point?
Yeah, I already went to Munich over there.
Yeah, yeah.
And lived in Africa.
to take a student's home because my mother was letting him live in a furnished room with my friends.
It was different times.
Anyway, stop me when you say that.
So this parent immigrated to Holla.
And he came to class.
Were they fearful of what was happening?
Yes, yes.
While my father-in-law was born and spoke, I think every European language through it.
My mother-in-law was very fine, so she said, this is not a great issue.
Wendy, of course, the question, where he can go, and when he will take us, anything can go.
So they emigrate, I couldn't tell you exactly what it was, but it must have been, they say, I,
Yeah, I was already.
I had gone to Paris, had gotten a job, you know, once a child.
Not back, no.
Children.
Camps.
And they took literally these children.
I was born in Germany.
But it's fine, actually.
Then it worked out.
And I was there from May to September.
It was like a children's camp, you know.
This is 33.
In 33, in September, the camp closed.
My mother holds me.
I'm an only child.
My mother holds me, if you are so happy there, maybe you want to stay.
I knew.
It was cold.
That was cold.
Right.
And I knew it was hard.
Because if I said I was an only child.
And so.
What was your maiden name by the way up?
A-R-A-P-P.
That's an easy name.
That's an easy one.
Anyway, go to your home.
So here I was in France.
My mother said, don't come back.
And I have no way to live there.
So when I took these kids back, some of the kids that were come from Russia, I had to bring them to the Jewish agency because they had arranged that they would come into their camp.
While I was bringing back some kids, there was a woman sitting there that said, don't you look for a job?
I said, yes.
And she said, well, I have two children and I need some help.
So I came into my family.
and it was not called a cloud, it was no pair or something.
You couldn't pair the cloud.
So I was there, and that indicated too much.
And all decided to open a vision.
And his father said, I can give you so much money.
I have so much money, I want books for so much money.
And he trusted Shulder Stratans completely.
But he trusted Shulder Stratans completely, as I said, the head already talked about.
And he never felt that he was cheap.
He always felt that he was cheap.
This was a good way for him to come.
So he suddenly was a dealer in old and rare books, in the emphasis on science and ethics.
The office at the PAS,
U-U-I-D-R, which is very clear.
The office I would, I don't example, was this thing is from the window to this chair.
And he had left his chair and had built a few bookcases and the time-rider was under the bed because there was no more
And that's what they said.
What did he call the store?
Older mailbox.
Right.
I didn't pull out, but I'm sure this was very good.
The catalog, which some were, some were sent in the German bookseek, or French bookseek, I don't know, but it was auctioned out in the hotel.
No.
that you might be interested in.
Catalog, as I said, was very kind, yeah.
So, that was his first catalog.
So, all this was in 33.
Yeah.
And so we started there.
By 34, we got married, and moved to Vincent.
Vincent is, do you know Paris at all?
Well, then, it's like you can go here by subway to Riverdale.
It was a subway.
You could go here, I see, by subway.
By train.
Oh, it was a subway.
It was by subway.
Yeah.
And we moved in there.
And we moved apart.
And...
Claude was born in 36 years.
And it was very small.
And one day he came home and said, today I had to borrow a few forms from the doorman or something, because I really had no money.
And then there was a very lucky strike.
There was Mag, which is one of the big English girls,
And there was a man by the man of Juvim.
Juvim, the sixth.
He's that same name.
He's not the famous man.
He was a chemist and was sick in Paris.
And someone gave a book, an old
And he got into two old strangers and went to Max and said, who did you put in the dress?
And Mr. Ebbinghausen, who was a place to the place, but I see it there, all the stories about Mr. Ebbinghausen.
But I was somewhere else.
Mr. Ebbinghausen said, yes.
But you have to look for some kind of, they are not just lying around.
You can look at the book dealers, but you cannot look at that.
However, there is a young refugee who just as old and in this field, why don't you know it?
Engage the app.
Wow.
and Mr. D, you can name it.
If it's too beautiful, it's too beautiful, then it's too beautiful.
To be in comparative with Mr. D, Mr. D, thank you, and thank you very much.
What is it, what is it?
And after that, he lived.
And what did he do for a living?
He was a kid.
Was he a collector or was this for a kid?
No, no.
He became a collector.
He was just intrigued.
that might have belonged to me.
But this was just starting for me.
That was also your first major customer.
Our first major customer.
And this was probably 34.
I don't know if he was already married or if he stayed after.
Anyway, I had some problems.
I was supposed to be in the country.
Well, anyway, he got married, named Akshay, but married with a Mary of the Motherland, in the Mary of the Motherland, very elegant, there, and it was very nice, and we had luck in our country, you know, a little bit, you know, and that was a great course.
And so, by and by, his father, and he got other customers, he always had to
In 1939 we went out to Jason, started to go on and there was a nice spa, I had to go another spa and went there, in Auburn.
Where did you go?
A year started to go on.
It was, you can say,
I was pregnant.
Because we thought, when the Germans moved into Czar, no war was started, that war would probably not be another war, but if you had another child.
So that was 39, and probably 39, that war was alive.
Then Emil was returned for a short while,
but was released because he had a pension child.
He was in turn for about three or four years.
So how do you say the story already attached to it because he wanted to enlist him in a job and went to La Roche, which was the nearest bigger town, and then went there to enlist for the first day of the organization.
But he was sure that he couldn't do it.
He was close.
So he had to stay overnight, meet his German passport, so they say the German, and then they came and he thirsted.
So it was every three weeks.
Then he came back home, and then we were accused of giving signs to the Germans.
Right.
Yeah, signs to the German airplanes.
Oh, excuse me, it hurts.
There was so much confusion.
So we were taught, we were not interested in other relations, but we were only taught it couldn't stay at the beach show.
It had to go.
This is over by Boulogne now, right?
No, by Sable de Boulogne.
Not Boulogne.
It was in Jaure-sur-Mer, and Sable d'Olonne is a bigger town there.
In the Mont-des-E, right?
Mont-des-E, that's easier now.
How do you spell?
V-E-N-E-E-E.
And so we went to the nearest indoor, you know, what do they call it?
Cartier, I think.
a different name that comes back again, which was called Les Deux Serres, and New York Deux Serres, so we lived in New York.
So you've left Paris now.
We have left Paris for vacation.
So this is in the summer.
He never went back.
He left everything in our apartment.
I actually had moved from Vincennes to Saint-Mondé, but he never went back to his office.
We never went back to our apartment.
All was left there.
Emil went back just to get some diapers and some clothes for the baby.
Well, because of the fact that the war had started?
Because of the fact that the war had started.
And he traveled on a German passport, which was not very desirable.
I mean, he wasn't normally asked, but if he was asked, his one big identity was a passport.
So we moved to New York.
See, you could make a story of everything to think.
Lived in New York.
Their province was poor.
And about a week, or two weeks,
After she was born, the policeman came and said to Emil, he had to be interned.
Again, he'd already been interned once.
Once he was interned, and that is the second time.
But they didn't intern him.
They told him to go to a camp where he would be interned.
He had to travel to half a camp.
And they told him on his own.
On his own.
So maybe they were saying, get out of France, is probably what they were saying.
Maybe.
But by that time, he had a family.
And he went to the camp, the Rüscher.
Did he go to the camp?
Yes.
What else could he do?
You know, you couldn't just go out of France.
I mean, with a German passport.
So many people tried to go over Switzerland, to Spain.
It was a dangerous thing.
So he went to the camp, which was called Camp Rüscher.
And there were many, many Germans
anti-Hitler people, well-known anti-Hitler people.
Not necessarily Jews.
No, no, not necessarily Jews, but people who had written books against Hitler.
They were all... What was the name of the king?
Ruchard, R-U-C-H-A-R-D.
Okay, there's probably something written about it too.
Probably you find something about Ruchard, Kent Ruchard.
And there were many well-known people.
I don't know what he writes in his... Oh, does he have his piece there?
I took it out there, yeah.
Are you going to let me borrow that and copy it?
No, I do not.
I told you there was some... You can read it.
May I?
Okay.
Yeah, but you cannot copy it.
And I told you there was some discussion about this, yeah.
I understand.
But you have it out, that's why I know it.
Yeah, I have it, yeah.
I'm really interested in his experiences, of course, as the bookseller, too.
Right, yeah.
Well, that's... Let me see.
French ceremony.
This is all long before that.
Fender's being reunited, he had to find a place to live in, and that's also still earlier.
Here he is about...
No, this is the first time when he was interned.
Anyway, maybe we can look at that a bit later.
It's the first time that he was interned, but I want to show you.
I wondered if there were names.
Camp Ruchard.
So I found myself traveling north to the camp,
R-U-C-H, just the way you spelled it, right?
Yeah, I-U-C-H, near Azay-le-Rideau, that is the town that's near the town, the place.
A-Z-A-Y hyphen, L-E hyphen, Rideau, R-I-D-E-A-U, on the Loire River.
I read you this.
During the approximately four weeks I spent at Rucha, I met some old friends and made the acquaintances of some interesting people.
Among the inmates were some members of the intellectual elite of German refugees who hitherto had escaped internment.
Now, however, they were indiscriminately taken in, notwithstanding the fact that they were Hitler's staunchest adversaries.
Such as, to cite only, that's what I was looking for, to cite only one example, the German political author Konrad Hayden.
You might have heard of him.
H-E-I-D-E-N.
who had written the most devastating biography of the great adults.
Conrad with a K, right?
Yes, Conrad with a K, right.
H-E-I-D-E-N.
The complete unawareness of the French was most vividly demonstrated at the time of the abrupt termination
of our sojourn at Ruchard.
In June, after the Germans had invaded France and an armistice being concluded, the commander of the camp assembled us in the courtyard and made a little speech telling us that in view of the circumstances, he had to let us go because the Germans had been victims.
and that he had only one request, namely that as an old army officer who had served his country for many years, he wished we would show our respect for him by not giving our joy too open expression.
To this, the audience replied by unanimously shouting, Vive la France!
Now, this is a Frenchman?
This is a French camp that they're in?
Yeah, it's a French who...
in turn, the Germans.
But this was an enemy of Hitler who was in prison, too?
Yes.
Why would the French want to imprison?
Well, this, anybody German was in prison.
So, basically, it was anyone German was in prison.
Any German was in prison.
I see.
So, it had nothing to do with political... And many were Jews, of course, but many were not Jews, like this kind of statement.
And that's what he says.
It was the French's count.
So, they scream... So, vive la France.
which left this poor man in utter consternation.
At no point had he realized that his prisoners were in much greater danger of being captured by the Germans than by the French.
May I read that a little bit?
I don't know if anybody corrected it.
Maybe his daughter corrected it, but I don't think so.
So that, I read you this, because this is really of some interest.
As I said, everybody was interned, and then they were released.
Then they were released and were running, because nobody had anywhere to go.
And the Italians had not yet made peace, so they were bombed.
Anyway, he ended up in Limoges.
In the meantime, I was still in Lyon, where Florence was born.
Limoges was occupied, became occupied.
I didn't know where he was.
I had no idea where he was.
He had written to me.
How long was this?
That you didn't know that you were out of time?
For about two months.
He had written one of the last letters he had written to me.
send me all the money you have.
But I had no money.
And I knew that at that time he probably thought of running to Switzerland or Spain or something to do his cake somewhere.
Anyway, I had no money.
I couldn't send any money.
And then I didn't hear from him.
And then two months later came a postcard which said, I have the postcard, I don't know where it is.
I am sick, healthy, injured.
And you could underline it.
And a few more things like this.
I'd like to hear from you with no address or anything.
But a postal stamp, and it came from divorce.
And I knew that it was a divorce.
And then I set out with the children to see none of this myself.
But you really don't want to hear my story.
You want to hear something about old kids.
Well, I want to get you to coming here.
Yeah, all right.
So then I went and looked for him and found him.
It was not easy, I assure you, with two children and not knowing where.
And it was difficult to get from one part of France into the other part.
But we got there.
In the meantime, he had become...
a, well, what would you call it, a work soldier.
He was not a full soldier.
He was not a prisoner.
He was a work soldier.
He worked for the French.
He worked for the French or for the Germans.
I don't even know.
No, he worked for the French.
And there was a whole group there.
And I had gotten near that place by the purest of chance.
because when I went, well, not pure, sometimes, I headed for Limouge, but got stuck before that, and someone took me over the border, and so then I was in Belac, and in Belac, where I, which is, oh, maybe 50 miles from Limouge, not very far, and someone had taken me there and said, why don't you
rest overnight and go tomorrow and look for emotion.
And then he said, and I told him a little bit, this man was the mayor of Bellagenet's car.
Anyway, so he said, and I told him a little bit, I said, if only I could get the kids to America.
In the meantime, my in-laws had gone to America.
My father-in-law... From Germany.
From Holland.
My father-in-law, being born in France, could get a visa immediately as a French, because the American count where you were born, not where you have lived or what you are.
So he was born in Paris.
He could get a visa immediately.
So they had already arrived in America, and I said, if I could only get the kids to America.
To here?
In New York?
Did they come to New York?
To New York, yeah.
If I could only get the kids to America.
And then this man said, you know, the American Red Cross has retreated and is now in Belak.
Maybe you should talk to them first.
So I went in there and talked to somebody in uniform and told my story.
And she said, and I said, is there any transport of children?
because there would be a very definite address and someone who would take care of the truth.
She said, no, we haven't found that yet.
We have many other things to do before we think of that.
But your story sounds very familiar.
And I looked at her.
She said, yes, let me look.
Your name is unusual, so it cannot be as we say.
And she came back and said, is your husband Emil?
And I said, yes.
And she said, he was here two weeks ago.
I said, where is he now?
She said, I didn't keep time off here.
But he said, there is a group of work soldiers up there.
They are all refugees.
He might be there, or someone might know him near Taiwan.
That's fascinating.
So is Claude, my son, who was then four years old.
So I left this method abroad in a crypt.
He said, just leave the baby here.
I went up to .
And I asked many people whom I heard speak in German, do you know them by the name of Offenbacher?
No, no, Offenbacher.
And then I saw a man, and I said, if Amy knows anybody, he could be this man, because he looked very bookish, and he had a book under his arm, and so on.
And so I asked him, he said, yes, we have an Offenbacher, but he isn't called Amy.
And I said, come on.
Common name.
But I did say, is he the father of this child?
And he looked at his clothes and said, undoubtedly.
Undoubtedly.
Yeah.
So then I knew he was there.
And I said, where is Emil now?
He said, well, he works, but you go right up to Sansovere and he will appear there.
And I think the real letdown in my whole story is that I was sitting there, flawed,
And Emil comes and says, hi, because he had in the meantime been told, you know, your wife.
He just said, hi, as if I had never been anywhere else.
Well, and then he spent in Belag some time.
And in the meantime, my in-laws tried.
And again, he was not working in Belag because he worked for the government.
In the meantime, my in-laws tried to get visas for us, but it wasn't possible to get a visa for someone German.
And they bought us a visa for Cuba.
But that wasn't always easy.
I mean, the buying of the visa for Cuba, I think, was comparatively easy, if you want to spend the money.
It's getting closer, isn't it?
Yeah.
But how to get out?
You needed to go through Spain, because we couldn't go through France, because that was occupied.
So we had to go into Spain to get... So where are you now?
Are you still in France?
I'm still in Belac in France, yeah.
I'm still in Belac.
But this part is not occupied yet by the Germans?
No, no.
No, that was when I had Emil found it.
Not occupied by the Germans.
And we lived in a house that had no windows, but we lived there.
And then Emil applied for a passport.
He had no passport yet.
He had to go to Vichy.
In Vichy, there were the Scandinavians who took care of Germans because, of course, there was no German.
But anyway, we made it.
Not immediately, but we did make it into Spain and got on a Spanish boat and came to Cuba.
This is 1934?
This is 1941.
You're kidding.
No, I'm not kidding.
This is 1941.
The war started in 1939.
So, it's 1941.
We came to Cuba.
We're interned.
but in a very snotty camp.
It was clean, it was warm.
By the Americans?
No, by the Cubans.
And had everything to eat.
We wanted lots of food, and it was just marvelous.
And then, well, yeah, coming out of France, and we had nothing to eat.
And therefore, a week in Spain, we had for breakfast for the four of us, because Florence is out in town.
But Emil, I, and Claude, who was by that time
four years old, not quite, she was just months younger than four years old, and the three of us eight, we got a role, like for Frankfurt, that was what we got for practice, but we didn't have more.
Spain had nothing to eat.
And we got here, we got to Spain, they interned and felt it was very marvellous, very fine.
And about a week when we were there, one day our name was called, and my in-laws had come on a banana boat on a coastline.
And since the banana boat went on to a few other islands, my in-laws stayed in a hotel, took us out into a very nice and elegant hotel with a great change in life.
And the next day,
My father-in-law and my husband went to the consul, to the American consul, and the consul said, nobody comes out anymore.
If you can prove that your children will not be welfare resistant, I can give them the visa immediately.
So I said, I have to see all four of them, you know, that they are not sick.
And then there are the medical...
Exam, first we had one for Cuba.
I never took my coat off when we had the example of Cuba with all the money.
Anyway, we had bargained for so much talk, you thought you would hear anything about antiquarian book dealers.
We got, we immigrated on the banana boat.
My father-in-law said, do you have room for two grown-ups and two children?
And we immigrated on the banana boat.
So you came to America on a banana boat?
We came to America on a banana boat.
And the immigration officer came only up for us.
Everybody else was there.
You know, there were Americans who went on a cruise.
So he came.
So everything was left behind, whatever stock he had, any books, that was all... Nothing.
What we had consisted of his typewriter put together with a piece of string and a food mill, which I had in a big shopping bag where I prepared food for flowers, who was then just about a year old.
And one suitcase, which was also put together as a piece of string.
I don't know what was it.
You know, whatever we had.
And my father-in-law said, I think you can leave your package here.
Leave it in Cuba.
No, leave it at the boat there.
Oh, I see.
Yeah.
Well, it was all we had.
We did not hear anything like that.
We were very offended when we said that.
He lived on 90...
Ford and Madison.
Wow.
In a three-room apartment.
What was his business?
He was in metal and had always traveled.
The firm, I think at that time, yeah, he still worked for an international firm.
So they were not impoverished by any means?
They were not impoverished, no, by any means.
But by that time, they were old, you know, and it was quite clear that he would not work much longer.
Anyway, they lived in a three-room apartment, albeit a large apartment, on 94th and Madison.
And when the doorman threw our letter, he didn't say anything, but he thought the same thing as my father-in-law.
He should have left that.
So this is now 1941.
You get to New York.
This is now April 1941.
So it's still seven, eight months before America.
Pearl Harbor, unfortunately.
And then, and this is where now comes the antiquarian book dealer, there was Erwin Rosenthal, who was Barney's father, and who had a big firm in Munich.
He also had a firm in Switzerland.
He was a big book dealer.
And he said, I hope to get to America.
I think I'll get my visa.
It wasn't quite clear yet if it went.
And I would like to open a firm again in America.
But I cannot open a big firm.
And I don't want to open a small firm under my name.
But I would like to have you as my employee and use your name for the firm.
His name was not a big name.
So he came and made.
So he basically was going to be Rosenthal's partner, but the business would be in his name?
No, no.
He was not his partner.
He was an employee.
An employee, but he would use his name.
But the business was in his name, yeah.
Well, that's great.
But he was a straight employee.
Well paid, I should say.
But why didn't Rosenthal want to use his own name?
Because the firm of Rosenthal was too big to have a little office here.
So it would have been embarrassing.
It would have been embarrassing.
I mean, it would have put him down, I mean.
So this was one way to do business, and yet I understand.
Right, yeah.
So it was back to me.
And it was Emil Offenbach.
So it was agreeable to everybody.
It was agreeable to everybody, and lasted until the war started.
So just about eight or nine months.
Right, maybe a few more months, yeah.
And then it was for Emil Feint or work, and the work was not an antiquated book dealer.
So he worked in a firm that made airplanes, or parts of airplanes.
In England.
In Manhattan, in a firm that did part of the airplane.
And I think that is the end of his story.
Does he talk at all in here about his work in the book business at all?
Or this is just his personal background?
Not very much, no, because that's not...
That's already in Yaw.
This is Mjönig.
I have a new poster on Ludwigstraße in Mjönig.
The writing was short.
That was when the Nazis came in.
I see.
So did you ever talk about, I mean, was there anxiety about the Nazis?
Did you talk about that?
Oh, yes.
By that time... You were certain, of course, that had you stayed.
By that time, I mean, it was such...
that I went to Paris without knowing anything, what kind of a job, whom I would meet, not knowing a single person or so.
But it was a saving.
I mean, to come is possible, to be allowed to go out.
So after the war, so then he worked in an airplane parts factory?
He worked in an airplane parts factory.
How long did he work there?
During the war.
So then, up until 1945 or so, right?
Right, right.
And that's what I'm just saying.
The Thunderbolt came on August 23rd when it became known that now this is still the European war.
Yeah.
We were free now, but yeah, but still France.
I'm trying to, in fact, if France comes a little bit of my
I did not have a French passport either.
They're still all to get out.
I happen to recall the name of the business.
That's when we came to Spain.
We had a few pounds, which I think, or a few dollars, which my father-in-law had sent, you know, took the rest or sent the pill.
But in Spain, they didn't take it.
So when did he start?
After the war, he got into the antiquarian book business again after the war?
He started in June 1939 with Erwin Rosenthal.
I understand.
Yeah, and then he started again, and that's what I'm looking for, where it is.
We arrived in New York at the end of March 1941.
The antiquarian book business at that time still suffered from the recession.
That was when he was already with Erwin Rosenthal.
He lived in Brighton Beach then.
My collaboration with Erwin Rosenthal lasted about two years.
Can I just take a look at this?
Yes, yes.
It starts here.
At the end of the war, he says,
On the day the armistice was signed, my services were not needed any longer and I lost my job.
At that time, my self-esteem was at such a low point that I had almost lost the courage to continue my original profession, which was book selling, which I had now to do in my own account.
So, however, having no other choice, I began to conduct my business from home on a small scale.
It took several months until I found my confidence again in the exact point
And that happened at the subject of a story which I have often told.
May I read this?
Yeah, sure.
That's why I did that.
One day I received the catalog of a rather indifferent book sale at the Swan Auction Galleries in New York.
You know the Swan Auction.
Very well.
Included in this catalog was the description of a small incunable of a religious text which caught my eye.
You know what an incunable is?
Of course.
Have you ever been an antiquarian book dealer?
Well, when you see my book, you're going to see it.
I say, okay, well, I don't know anything about your name.
My book... And as I said to my friend...